♪ ♪
Hello and welcome to another working-from-home episode of No Such Thing as a Fish, a weekly podcast
coming to you from four undisclosed locations in the UK.
My name is Dan Schreiber, I'm sitting here with Andrew Hunter Murray, James Harkin,
and Anna Tajinsky, and once again, we have gathered around the microphones with our
four favorite facts from the last seven days, and in no particular order, here we go.
Starting this week with my fact, my fact is sand dunes are brilliant at social distancing.
Mmm.
Oh yeah.
Topical.
Very topical.
So, they're safe.
Sand dunes are inanimate objects.
Okay.
So, I would suggest that if they're two metres apart, they will always remain two metres
apart as they're not moving, are they?
They sand dunes do move.
They constantly are travelling through the desert.
They are a body that falls over on itself and travels.
Okay.
So, yeah, sand dunes are constantly shifting, and that's why when deserts encroach on places,
you've got these giant waves of sand dunes that head towards you.
It's like an army, but scientists in Cambridge University have sort of simulated, they've
built an experiment whereby they've been able to study the movement of sand dunes, and
they've discovered that basically they do communicate with each other in, you know, inverted
commas communicate with each other by sending signals to not encroach on their patch, so
they don't collide.
We still fully don't understand why it is.
I mean, it's pretty extraordinary.
The latest theory that they've come up with is it's much like if you're in a boat and
there's the wake of the boat pushing the water back behind you, it's pushing the sand
June behind it to keep it at a regular distance.
Although we should say, because otherwise I think people will be confused, but when you say
collide, and it's a mystery whether they don't crash into each other, obviously the main
reason they don't crash into each other is because they're moved by winds and air currents,
and so you don't get one moving in one direction and another moving in the opposite direction
and then galloping towards each other very often.
So when we say crashing into each other, it's almost always one sneaking up on the other
or, you know, how calm one of them just go a bit faster than the other, and it does seem
to be, doesn't it, that the one in front, effectively slows down the one behind it?
Exactly.
And it's worth saying that there are different speeds, though, to sand dunes.
So a big sand-dune is much slower than a small of sand-dune, and when I say much slower,
I do realise we're talking by centimetres per year.
But they do travel at different speeds, and even the smaller ones will respect a distance
gradually as some kind of communication sort of.
Okay.
Again, it's all theories.
You're saying, like, a little guy will go really, really fast until it gets a certain distance
away from the big guy, and then it'll go, "Okay, now I'm going to respect the distance,
and I'm just going to slow down to your pace."
Exactly.
And then they move at the same pace.
Okay.
It's not going to crop up as a plotline in the first and the furious films anytime soon, basically.
The slow and the very, very placid.
They do kind of go to sleep, though, each night, and wake up each morning.
Again, this is a metaphor.
Because of that, there's a big, big temperature change, obviously, they're mostly in beachy
and deserty environments, and especially in the deserty environments, it's way warm
in the day, then at night.
And that big temperature difference stirs the sand quite a lot, and at noon, the sand-dune
kind of wakes up, and the little winds are generated by the temperature difference and
the greasing temperature, and they move the surface around.
And that can be another thing that moves the dunes a few metres a year.
So is it possible to tell the time if you're in the desert by looking at sand-dune or not?
I mean, I think you'd look at the colour of the sky, it's completely dark.
I think we know what time it is.
That's the most amazing nomad skill you could have.
That'd be really good.
I was reading the other day that if you're on a mountain and you want to know how high
it is, you can tell it by getting a bottle of Coca-Cola and putting some mentos in it.
You know that trick that they often do in America where you kind of put your mento mint in
there and then suddenly it sloshes up.
If you're on a mountain and you have those two things, you can put the mento inside the
Coke and the amount that it sloshes up, it can tell you the height of the mountain.
That's okay.
That's so cool.
It's to do with the air pressure, I think.
It's amazing that Edmund Hillary ever made it to the top of Everest without his Coke
mintos.
Do you need to have quite a big boss or presumably because is it the more it goes up the higher
you are, or is it an inverse relationship?
Well, here's the problem, I didn't really read that, but it's so if we were going to go
on a hiking expedition next week, I'm going to have to do a bit more research.
I guess the air pressure?
It's air pressure.
Yeah.
So, yeah.
Wouldn't your Coke freeze at a soda and height, though?
Would it freeze if you're on top of Mount Everest, which is the highest mountain?
Maybe.
What's how are they drinking?
Maybe they're taking out one of those thermoses that you carried soup in on a school trip
when you were young.
Exactly.
I can't believe you had soup in a thermos on your school trips whenever an outside sandwich
is.
Andy, actually, an incredibly traumatising childhood memory I don't want to talk about.
It was the worst thing ever.
It's incredibly embarrassing.
It always spilled everywhere on the coach.
No one would want to say next to me, "God, I hate my mother."
What was she thinking?
This experiment, we didn't quite go into it then, I think, right?
So, basically, what they had was like a big, perspex circular tank with two walls, so
the sand dunes could go around the circumference of the circle, right, and they could kind of chase
each other.
But the guy who did it was called Carol Batchick and he works in Cambridge University.
And the reason that he did this experiment is he was just looking at one sand dune going
around his thing and he's thinking, "This is boring."
It's like taking ages to get any kind of data.
And so, what I'm going to do is I'm going to double my capacity and put two sand dunes
in and then I could get twice as much data.
I'm just going to do that.
And then when he did that, it started a new experiment that he hadn't intended to do.
But what's really interesting is it's pretty much impossible to actually make a sand dune in
the lab.
For years and years, they said it was impossible.
This experiment gives an idea of what a sand dune might do, but of course, the difference
between that and an actual massive meters and meters high sand dune could be quite different.
And so, in Mongolia, in 2007, they got a bulldozer and flattened a whole lot of the desert
and they set up an experiment to see a sand dune being made from scratch.
Wow.
But show me, even the longest PhDs don't quite last long enough to genuinely want to sand
dune form from nothing and then move, do they?
Or do they just sit in the desert for decades?
They just sat there for decades, yeah.
They passed it on to their children, actually.
Wow.
It's like a sourdough starter.
Well, not unfortunately, just as it happens, what they learned was exactly what everyone
thought would happen according to the experiments they did in the lab.
So they did all these experiments and it turned out that what happened was exactly what
everyone thought was going to happen, which-
That's annoying.
Is it annoying in a way, but in another way, at least they've proven their theories are
correct?
Yeah.
Did you know the second highest sand dune in Europe is in Wales?
Is it?
That place, which is nicknamed the South Wales Sahara, it's 800 acres of sand.
And the dune's got up to 200 feet tall, which is actually-
That's massive.
Yeah, yeah.
It's so sandy there that Lawrence of Arabia was partly filmed there.
Really?
It was a stand-in for Arabia, yeah.
The tallest ones in France, isn't it?
I think I've been to it.
Yeah.
Have you?
The tallest one in Europe.
I actually have been to the tallest one in the world as well.
Wow.
That's in Peru, I think.
And I've stand-boded on it as well.
Cool.
How do you do it?
How do you go about that?
You pay money and they give you, they take you on a dune buggy and they do lots of tricks
over the sand dunes and then they take you to the top of one of the biggest ones and
they put you on what is less like a snowboard and more like a tea tray and they tell you
just to go to the bottom and to make sure that you talk everything because I didn't stand
up on it, I kind of like body-bodied down it and they tell you to hide all your limbs otherwise
they'll get chopped off and stuff.
It's like, sir, what environment are you going through?
That's what they said.
They said like, if you don't tuck your arms in then you'll probably lose them.
Wow.
I know you remember tea trays because your mum probably gave you one so that you're often
in tea on all these cool trips.
Actually, sand duneing, what are you calling it, sandboarding?
Sandboarding can be quite dangerous.
Well, that's what they said.
How many, what kind of injuries and you lose your arms and legs, I told you.
You can, obviously, by fine that when you get to the bottom of the sand dune then all
your limbs have chopped off, but you can find this is incredibly rare.
They didn't know it could happen until 2013 but you can just fall into one.
So, do you read this extraordinary story?
No, obviously not, otherwise I wouldn't have gone sandboarding.
This oven in 2013 is in a place called Mount Bulldy which is on the side of Lake Michigan
in Indiana and it's a huge sand dune.
It's a 126 feet tall and it swallowed a boy.
I'm just going to say right now, just so everyone's not traumatised, the boy ended up
okay.
But, he was running up at the top of the sand dune with his mate and his dad to then run
down it or do James' trick and suddenly he disappeared and his dad looked around and
he'd gone and his friend said he just fell into the sand and got swallowed.
I mean, you would, even if you're not done, you would immediately think Mongolian death
worm, wouldn't you?
So, that was the conclusion they all jumped to and they spent weeks looking into that to
no avail.
No, this is amazing, bizarrely by chance there was a geologist who was walking by and she
saw dozens of people on the side of this sand dune just digging away in the sand saying,
this just swallowed a small boy, we need to get him out.
And one of the people, they heard the boys say from deep within the dune, "Help me, I'm
scared."
And this geologist was like, that is rubbish, that's totally impossible and she just walked
on, went home.
Even though she heard the child, she didn't, no, no, no, she didn't hear the child, she
just got told by the people digging, she thought, no, that kid's just playing hide and seek.
Anyway, it turned out they saw these tiny little holes in the sand that kind of went through
and it seemed that they were leading towards some massive cavity underneath it which she
just dropped into and then I got immediately covered up and they excavated and excavated
after three and a half hours, they managed to find him hidden in a cavity in the sand dune
12 feet underground and he was unconscious and like really cold and he spent a couple of weeks
in hospital and amazingly recovered but they had no idea why sand dune shouldn't swallow
anyone up and this geologist hated herself so much for not believing it had happened
at the time.
She's then led this amazing study, she's called Erin Argyllan and she's found out that it's
from hollowed out trees so the sand dune is galloped along as they do and it's galloped
over these old trees have rotted then from the inside and been encrusted with fungus
so it's just got these tubes so it's got these weird channels leading down from it but they
don't, you can't see the openings in the in the surface so it looks like nothing.
Wow, that's really cool.
Don't sound awful.
There's another thing that they might swallow apart from six-year-old boys which is there
was a city built in Tunisia for Star Wars and not the original Star Wars films, I'm talking
episode one, The Phantom Menace, the true original but in 2013 there were lots of news reports
and I haven't annoyingly, I haven't found what happened after these reports but it's
reported that that location city built for The Phantom Menace which is called Moss Esper
in the movie was about to be buried by a giant crescent-shaped sand dune and this was really
good news actually, not only because it removed evidence of the Phantom Menace from the
city else, also because it was hard for scientists to measure sand dune movement because it's
very hard to find a fixed measurement point because it's a nightmare when you're in
the desert you think oh well is this moved 50 meters or has it not moved at all?
We don't know because there's nothing else here apart from more sand but this was obviously
very useful because it was fixed in the ground.
And they could kind of look at where it is and compare it to the movie and say okay on
this date it was in front of this part of Star Wars in the first and then it was here but
they would have to watch The Phantom Menace though to do that.
That's true and no scientist has been found.
Yeah that's a PhD but you really don't want to do.
I'd rather stand in the Mongolian desert for 20 years.
One of the famous things about sand dunes is that they make this singing noise and Marco Polo
wrote about it in the 13th century he said that he heard eerie sounds coming from the sand dunes
around him and that the logical conclusion was that he must be in the presence of evil
spirits.
Wow cool.
But it has to be really specific sand doesn't it?
You can't get on any old sand dune there aren't actually many in the world that do it
but it's got to be a very fine type of sand and I think it's the same sort of mechanism
that you get on some beaches where the sand really squeaks and I've never really had this
before because in Britain we have beaches that I love but that are objectively quite crappy.
So I'd never seen it before until I went to visit Bruni Island off the coast of Tasmania
at Christmas and there every time you put your foot down it sort of shrieks at you like
it's hurt you feel kind of bad for it.
Yeah it is weird creaky floorboard sounds isn't it as you're walking along so you can't
sneak up on someone on a beach it's actually a very good mechanism to throw.
That's why you moved here isn't it down because you just kept getting caught in Australia.
We've been giving sand dunes very mixed messages in this country lately because we've been
trying to get them to stop moving for years and building fences around them and people sometimes
cover them in oil which is very unpleasant which should like ways them down and we plant
lots of vegetation on them so if you go to the coast you'll see vegetation planted and
suddenly conservationists have turned around and said oh hold on, sand dunes are supposed
to move.
This is like kind of nailing a horse to the floor and so now we're talking which is and they
don't do that because horses are supposed to move and so now we're trying to get sand dunes
moving again and the national lottery is given 4 million pounds to get sand dunes moving
again.
Wow.
They've set up a new app haven't they the couch to five metres.
Okay, it is time for fact number two and that is James.
Okay my fat this week is that according to a recent publication people from the north
of England are more than twice as likely to be naturally funny than people from the south
of England.
Sounds like a very scientific publication who conducted this.
Oh I didn't write that down.
I probably was it nature or I can't remember it was the b-no it was the comic for b-no but
who knows comedy better than the people who write the b-no that's what I want to know.
Absolutely.
So what were the details of the study?
They were scant.
It was the analysis of famous British comedians carried out by statistician Dr Jeff Ellis and
he looked at all the different comedians and what their particular attributes are and
then he surveyed people to say how funny do you think these people are and I think thanks
to the fact that Peter K comes from the north of England and people like Peter K when
we came at the top and you guys are all not as funny.
Yeah.
Didn't he also say that a gem in eyes are more naturally funny than Leo's?
I didn't read that bit because I'm not a gem in eye.
I only cherry picks the bits that specifically said good things about me.
Ah okay.
I think there's a study to also say that and can I just say as a Leo from the south of England
I'm just honoured to be here.
People who are born in a city are supposed to be funny and you were born in London.
I was.
Is that again is that a causing to apparently professional statistician Jeff Ellis who
must be questioning where his career's gone right now?
The Bino is pretty dry these days if they're having to resort to statistical analysis.
We should quickly say there'll be a lot of international listeners who might not know
what the Bino is.
This is the longest running comic in the UK and it is famous for having created Dennis
the Menace, the British one, not the American one and there has a sort of sister publication
called Dandy that has desperate Dan and so a lot of iconic British characters came out
of this.
It was named after you walking along a beach, wasn't it?
Depraved Dan was the character's original name.
Deported Dan after Daniel and I was caught.
You mentioned desperate Dan in the very olden days so it feels right that we're correcting
the balance now.
I think he had to give our beating cow pie didn't he?
Oh yeah.
We all have a friend who used to work on the Bino until quite recently.
Really?
Matthew Heighton, comedian, excellent comedian, I should say, also from the north of England
very funny guy.
He used to work for the Bino and he's still part of the Bino WhatsApp group where everyone
sends each other messages about the Bino and I asked him if they had any facts and so do
you want to hear some facts from the Bino WhatsApp group?
So the Bino offices in London are on Fleet Street and it is where people believe that
Swini Todd was supposedly had his barbershop and so they get loads of tours of people who
want to see the kind of dodgy, murdery parts of London always go to the Bino offices and
have a look around.
They don't go into the offices, they go into like the alleys next to the office because
that's amazing.
Swini Todd supposedly feels.
They're one of the biggest pranksters of all time, Swini Todd.
Well, he didn't have cow pies but he did have people pies, didn't he, I guess.
Yeah, probably the inspiration for desperate Dan, who knows.
I found out in my Bino research, niche fact that definitely international listeners weren't
care about, which is the breed of dog that Nasha is because if you look at Nasha, he's just
sort of like a big frizzy lump of black with some legs sticking out and he's actually
a very rare breed. He's an Abyssinian wirehead of tri-pound and he's a very rare breed of dog
from the mountains of Eastern Africa, according to the Bino website.
They're world famous for their thick black coats which are as strong and tangled as barbed
wire, which is weird because barbed wire actually when it's erected is not tangled at all.
But they're also famous for their strong.
The bar bits are.
Yeah.
I suppose bits of it are.
You're right, the bar bits are, aren't they?
Sorry, Anna.
Are you just being silly?
This isn't a real kind of dog, is it?
Of course it is, they're also famous for their strong teeth that can chew through concrete
and smash bricks.
Did you know that Nasha can speak real people words, but only on Halloween.
Oh.
Again, well, this breed of dog is particularly famous for that.
They are extremely rare now.
The American Dennis Menace, we've mentioned before, the beautiful coincidence that they both
appeared at the same time.
These two characters with the same name and both wear red and black costume.
And American Dennis the Menace, I was looking into how he came about his origin story.
And he was actually inspired by, this is the story that's told in 1950 when the artist
Ketchum was drawing, his wife came in to interrupt him to say that their own four-year-old son,
Dennis, had just demolished their bedroom by putting fecal matter that he'd found in his
underpants all over the room and declared him a menace.
And so he thought, oh, that sounds like a good character name.
So he went healthy clean up the shit off the walls and then created Dennis the Menace.
Because there was a song a few years before both of these characters came along that was
quite popular called Dennis the Menace from Venice.
And most people think that the reason that they came at the same time is because they were
both inspired by this song, which had become popular.
But the poo on the wall story is quite persuasive, so it might do that.
The poo on the wall story also features in the music called song, doesn't it?
So I think it might take the same trajectory.
I think the creators of the British version of Dennis said that he was inspired by that
musical song.
And actually, I looked up the lyrics to this song, although I can't find the melody
and I really want it.
Dennis the Menace from Venice is a gay gondolier with gold rings in his ears.
And he's a massive player.
So the whole song is about how he's this gondolier who seduces other men's wives down the canals
of Venice.
And the nine in the evening, he dines with a blonde at 10, he has got a brunette.
At midnight, you'll find him with some ginger gal, and he teaches them all how to pet.
Well, it's a bit like mumbo number five, doesn't it?
Another song which originally ended up with the protagonist smearing his poo on over the
walls.
Mumbo number two, they had to rename it in the name.
There was, it's obviously a lot of the humour in the Bino is really lavatorial, and there
was a plan in 2017 to do a Bino takeover at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.
And what they wanted to do was amend the, they've got a cast of Michelangelo's David there,
and they wanted to tweak it so that it would fart as people pass by.
And I can't find any evidence that it happened because there was fury in the museum that there
was going to be, there was actually genuinely irritating to people.
And one, there was a memo doing the rounds about the plans, and somebody replied and inside
it from the museum said, "Frankly, some of the things in the memo are disgusting while it's
important to encourage children to visit farting statues are not the way to do it."
So Bino launched in 1938, and there's not many copies left of the original issue, but
by weird coincidence, I saw one the other day, a friend of mine, yeah, called Oli Driscoll.
He's a cameraman for, he works on movies like the latest Jurassic Park movies and touching
the void and the fast and furious movies.
Back in 1999, he bought the Bino first issue for 6,000 pounds.
And as far as he knows, it's the only issue that has the toy, that it came with the free
toy, which was a mask.
Oh my God, he has, you know the guy who has that.
Yeah, he hasn't shown it to me, yeah, and he hasn't in mint condition and he's up for selling
it.
So if anyone wants to buy a very expensive comic book magazine, he's got it for sale.
Dan, I'm really interested because I read a bit about that thing and it said that it came,
it said the toy that it came with, it called it a woopie mask, and I obviously only know
the woopie cushion, but presumably this is not a mask where someone has to sit on your
face.
I don't know, I think maybe woopie, is it possible?
Woopie had a different meaning to it back then.
I think it didn't far.
I've seen a picture and I can't see where they would have got the farting mechanism into
it.
It's very flat.
Glasses.
Yeah.
Do you know what the oldest comic strip in the world is about?
No.
This is what's established recently is the oldest of Weston comic book.
And by comic book, it's like something that's mass-produced and it has speech bubbles and
it released every week, every couple of weeks.
It's called Looking Glass and it ran for three editions and it was the adventures of
a coat being worn by different people.
Is it about that there's a go-goal story about the coat, isn't there?
The overcoat.
All the great thing.
Yeah, the other coat.
The other coat.
It was not based on a go-goal story.
It was pre-that.
It was 1825.
Wow.
Maybe go-goal based his story on the comic.
On his dream of a coat.
I just can't imagine two people had the same idea about doing a story about an overcoat.
You're right.
Well, we don't know this one was an overcoat.
It might have been an undercoat.
No.
It was just a coat.
What is an undercoat?
I don't know.
It's just something I made up that would be the opposite of an overcoat.
Anyway, it was, it had a character's like Billy the Bullie and Ranting Dan.
And this was, you know, 200 years ago.
Dan, you're getting an absolute pasting in it.
Okay, it is time for fact number three and that is Anna.
My fact this week is that in 1943, German troops who were rescuing Mussolini had to seize
control of a tourist, finicular railway, so they could ride a cable car to the top of
the hill and pick him up.
So cool.
What an awkward journey in that finicular railway cable car.
It must have been with the two elderly tourists and the 20 Nazi goons who refused to budge
and get out of it.
No, we paid for our ride and we will damn well take it.
So what was he doing at the top of the hill on that?
That's a good question.
He was just hanging out there.
So I didn't know this had happened.
But when Mussolini was deposed by his own people because they finally realised that he was
shit in every way in 1943, he was a reservoir's own council and they sort of took him prisoner
and they moved him around to a lot of different places and then eventually they plopped him
at the top of the Grand Saso d'Italia which has a lot of very high mountains in the Appanines.
And it's only reachable by cable car and Hitler was a fan of Mussolini, heard about this,
asked out where he was and ordered this rescue operation.
And so in order to rescue the plan was send some troops there and pick him up.
And so the other had to seize this cable car just because they go quite slowly cable cars
at the best of times.
And I reckon in 1943 very slowly, imagine the rush and the frenzy.
Yeah.
So it's a finicular cable car which is where they have the two counterbalances.
So they'll have two cable cars, one on one side and one on the other.
But it was a crazy operation, this Mussolini rescue.
It was part cable car based and mostly glider based and so the plan was for these ten tiny
little glider planes to land on the top of this mountain which they'd sort of done some
reconnaissance on and thought they'd seen a big meadow they could land on which turned
out to be a massive rocky field.
So they all crash landed, some of them were quite badly injured, ran in to pick up Mussolini.
And one of the SS commandos apparently vomited inside his glider which made it very unpleasant
to shovel in for the rest of them.
They were so flimsy these tiny little gliders and the pilots were so nervous about it because
of that that one of the pilots in one he couldn't see out the window because it was really
blurry so he got a knife out and he just jammed a hole in the fuselage so he could look
out and then pushed a bit the fuselage out so he could look out with a plane.
And then they picked him up.
They sort of and they sort of gave him up quite sort of okay take him that's fine like no
bullets were fired it was a and Mussolini requested that as well.
He said please no one no one shoots and yeah it was quite a peaceful operation.
And they didn't get him out by the finicular did they?
He no they were there was an idea to get him out by a finicular so they were planning
to land a plane at the bottom of the finicular that he could just board but the plane crash
landed and lost a wheel on landing so instead they got him out by a small light aircraft
from the top of the mountain and they got it okay which also sounds crazy and your wife
the pilot so maybe she could say how unstable this is but they were terrified about leaving
because it was a really light aircraft and it was overcrowded to the extent that Mussolini
was six foot four massive guy sat in the passenger seat and then the guy who was in charge
of the operation captain scores any was wedged in the luggage compartment behind an underneath
seat and way too heavy so it like career down this hill bonked down this hill which wasn't
the kind of surface they wanted and then did a nose dive off the edge of a precipice
and they only survived because the pilot realized that he'd have to leave it in freefall for
a while so in order to get up the requisite speed he could then pull the plane up and start
flying it away.
Mussolini was bad dude I think we can all agree.
He was also a British spy for some time yeah he was hired by the British in 1917 and he
was given a wage by MI5 to help keep Italy fighting in the war because in the first war they
were on the same side as the British and that was about £6,000 a week so you know he owes
a lot of his early success to MI5.
That's a huge amount of money.
Yeah I said modern day that much was that much at the time.
Modern day that much.
Yeah it was £100 a weekly wage at the time which is about £6,000 now.
Okay.
You have to buy a secondhand car or well you know what £6,000 you don't even eat it.
You can buy the first edition of the Beno for that back in 1999.
Terrible news.
Italy has dropped out of the war but I did secure this.
Check out my whirpy mask guys.
I think we've briefly mentioned before that his son Romano was a jazz musician.
Yes.
And a famous jazz musician more or less in his own right.
I just wanted to add on I found a memorial article about him in the Atlantic and the headline
was he made the refrains run on time.
Oh nice.
I'm funniculous.
Yeah.
Oh great.
I made a list of all the funniculars I've been on as part of my research.
Great.
How many?
And I've been on.
Well only six is not enough but one of them was closed when I visited it so it would
have been seven.
So can you just quickly re-explain for maybe some of the audience listening to this show
who might not understand what a funnicula is, what it is?
Sorry to do that.
We obviously all know.
So it's a little railway which is the normally they're designed to go up and down very, very
steep hills.
So if you've got a very steep mountain side, it's a great way of getting up and down there
with not too much without going round and round the houses.
So it's a direct line.
And usually one car is ascending while the other is descending.
So there are two.
And sometimes there's just one line and the cars are going towards each other and they're
about to hit each other and then just at the very middle of the line, the line branches
off into two and they go around each other and then use the same line again.
That's a very efficient way of doing it.
And the reason they're really useful is because you're using the weight of one of your
trains to pull the other one up.
So as one is descending, it's pulling the other one up so you need a lot less energy.
That's the crucial thing about them is the counterbalancing and they still use a little
motor so they still need to be able to pull themselves up the hill but it's so much
counterbalancing.
So they're using basically the potential energy of one to pull up the other one.
But like Anna says, you do need some, it's not a completely perfect system of amateur
motion.
So you need a little leg up.
Apparently sometimes you can make them move just by having enough people in the cabin.
If you crush enough slightly overweight people in, it can just weigh it's way down.
So that's an insulting moment when you step into a funicular.
And finally they're like, thank God we've got them.
OK.
It's like I was once in television studios in London and there was a lot of people in the
lift and I needed to get in the lift as well.
And I got in and as soon as I walked in it started beeping and said, sorry, too much weight
in this lift.
So I had to walk out and get the stairs while everyone else got the lift.
Yeah, that's all good.
That's very unfair, but it's just because you were the last one in.
It's only really insulting if you get in and the guy who's running a lift has alright
people, you six people are going to have to be a little afraid.
I was once on an aeroplane.
I don't know if I've said this before, but I got an aeroplane and I think it was in Hawaii
or somewhere.
It was somewhere where it's a small aeroplane and they made the move to counterbalance the
weight of the plane and said, excuse me Sarah, can you, can you set over the wings?
I'm not particularly overweight, man, you know, it's like, Andy, I want to know the
last time you went into a lift that there was a man running it, or all the lifts.
I only go into a lift which has an operative.
Yeah, it would have been longer ago than the last time I was in a finicular, which was in
Hastings last year.
You know, when you said you've been in six finiculars, does that include going up and going
down as separate ones?
Oh, okay, if we don't know, I've been in 12 finiculars.
I find them kind of weirdly lovely.
Again, I'm a bit of a finicular obsessive, not that much, because I've only been in 12/6,
but...
Furnicular and moss, they're your two loves, aren't they, Andy?
Pretty sad, isn't it?
If you imagine a finicular overgrown with moss, and that would be my dream.
But they are very cool, and I find them quite weird, because obviously they're only usual
in very hilly or mountainous places.
And so you get loads of them in seaside resorts, like Scarborough has five.
Really?
Yeah, or it has had five at various different points.
Hastings has two.
Do you guys know the song about finiculars?
No.
Really famous one.
Furnicular, from the 1880s.
Are you cool?
No.
You would know it.
If you heard it, you would know it for sure.
It's like a really famous Italian song that like...
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Furnicular, finicular, finicular, finicular, finicular, finicular, finicular, finicular, so it's really,
really famous in the 1880s.
And Richard Strauss was on holiday in Italy, and he heard this song, and he thought, because
it's such an absolute banger of a tune, isn't it?
He thought that this must be like a really old, like, classical Italian song, and so he put
it in one of his compositions, and then the guy who actually wrote it, who was living in
Italy, heard this, and he was like, "That's my song.
What's going on?"
And so he sued Richard Strauss for the money for his song, and he won as well, and as far
as I can see, it's like one of the oldest examples of someone suing for someone stealing
their songs.
Wow.
Isn't that cool?
That's amazing.
Jim Ireland has one cable car.
Just a one.
Just a one cable car.
It takes people from Cork to Dursy Island, which is just off the coast of Cork, and it's
the only way of getting to the island, and there was outcry a few years ago, when it was
announced that no longer was the cable car allowed to be used to transport cows.
This is actually a serious problem, because a lot of the Dursy Island industry, which
admittedly is quite small, I think it only now has two permanent residents.
A lot of the industry is quite cow-based, quite cattle-based, and the cable car is tiny.
It can fit one cow.
So when they were moving cows over, the farmers, you just were moving the cows across.
The farmers would have to put them one at a time, and this one cable car, there were great
pictures of them just embarking, and then would they have to sometimes put the cow across,
but then send some call and back, and then put a chicken back in and send that back.
There were so many awkward trial runs where the chicken was dead, the cow was dead and
they could only block them.
That's so amazing.
It's just one thing.
It's really cool.
Surely you could squeeze it.
You could go and lie on top of the cow.
Man, it's pretty small.
You could maybe squeeze in an Italian fascist, but that's not true.
I've got a new favourite cable car as a result of researching this fact.
It's a cable car.
I want to know what your old favourite cable car was.
My old favourite one was the one I got in Hong Kong, which took you across mountain ranges
to go to Ocean Park, which we used to get most of my childhood, astonishing cable car.
But that's been superseded by a mountain cable car in South Germany, which takes you to
the top of a mountain called the Wank.
I've been there.
You've been to the Wank?
Of course.
So you've been on the Wank Barn?
I have been.
I have watched ski jumping at the Wank mountain.
And I've watched Andreas Wank, the ski jumper, jumping at the Wank mountain.
I think it's right.
It's next to Garmish Heart and Care, can I think?
Yes, that's correct.
So, yeah, so to get to the top of it, if you want to take the quick way, you get the
Wank Barn and the Wank Barn leads you to the top and there's a Wank house at the top
as well.
And I just say, then, the Wank Barn sounds like the disgusting sequel to the song "Love
Shack."
It's a little no place where you can get together with yourself.
Yeah, so yeah.
And also, if you go regularly, you can get a Wank pass, which gets you a sort of year-round
permit to get the cable car.
Wow.
It's a pretty rough place to clean, isn't it?
That is cool cleaning stuff.
Coincidentally, I'm banned from all six of the funiculars I've been on, but not the other
six.
OK, it's time for our final factor, the show and that is Andy.
My effect is that, in medieval Germany, bad musicians were tied to an instrument called
the flute of shame.
That doesn't sound like much of a, I mean, was it a massive flute or...
It was, it was a flute.
I think everyone knew it was the flute of shame.
OK.
And that's, as always, that's where the shame comes from.
And so it's called the Shandflood, or Shandflood, and so this is, it was a metal device with
a collar at the neck, so it was clamped onto you.
And your fingers would supposedly be clamped at the keys, not really a flute, more of a clarinet.
I've written, I've written flournet in my notes, which I like, but that's just a mistake.
So there are a couple of these things only in existence.
One of them is in the Medieval Crime Museum in Rothenburg, and in other words, in the Amsterdam
Torch Museum.
And so there's a, I couldn't quite work out if these things, you know, were real or if
they were Victorian reproductions, but I did find a paper in the journal Torture, which
is all about other, it's about other shaming instruments.
And there were definitely things like the neck violin, which could be attached to you.
And you might be put in the, in a pillory, you know, you might be tied up somewhere with
this wooden violin, again, attached to your neck by a kind of iron band.
I saw a picture of that.
It doesn't, to me, it didn't look like a violin at all.
I think they just called it that because it goes on your neck, didn't they?
Exactly.
And then there are so much definitely to look like violins.
Oh, okay.
Because if this one does look like a flute, that's why it confused me.
Yes.
Or clarinet, you know.
Or clarinet.
It's one of larynx.
Do you have to play it while you're in it?
I mean, accounts vary.
Some people say you'd be sort of put on and walked around a bit, and you'd have to,
you know, go, yeah, I am a crap musician.
But.
Oh, it is the perfect instrument for feeling sorry for yourself as well, the violin.
So that's quite a piece.
Yes.
So I asked Greg Jenner about this, whether he thought this was a real thing or not.
And he asked Dr. Eleanor Jeneger, who is at Going Medieval on Twitter, who's a medieval historian.
And she isn't sure.
She thinks that it might be one of those inventions that were, as she puts it, retrofitted, as
in just like a Victorian, more of a Victorian idea.
On the German Wikipedia, it says, in recent times, the shan flute is often presented as
a punishment for bad musicians, but like the neck violin, which also resembles musical instrument,
it served to punish various minor violations of the legal system.
So not for musicians, but just a more general kind of punishment like the stocks kind of thing.
So I guess we just don't really know, do we?
It's kind of.
Yeah.
So the violin definitely seems to be a thing, but not necessarily for musicians, perhaps,
no, no.
It seems to make more sense that they'd be used to punish an actual crime, but they did
use to make punishments fitting with the crime.
So maybe if you've stolen a violin or beaten up a violinist, you know, it's, it's waiting
for a long time if you make a massive metal flute for someone to steal a flute, isn't it?
It's like, surely it'll happen eventually.
What do they steal?
Are they stolen some bread?
Okay.
Have we got a massive bit of metal, still waiting on the flute?
Not only did they have the neck violin, but I saw as well that in one of these museums,
the crime museum in Rotterdam, that they got a double neck violin.
And the idea of the double neck violin was, according to the little caption that goes
with the, with the item is that it was for arguing couples and they would have to walk around
with them on, sometimes with bells attached, ringing.
The idea was that they would walk in shame until they resolved their argument.
So it was just a quick way of making them actually talk to each other and shaming themselves
into an understanding of their points.
And why is there a violin hanging between them?
It just seems like they're totally a relevant part of that set up.
What's romantic?
Oh, so when they make up, they can do a little serenade.
Yeah, exactly.
It's like when someone comes to your table, where you're having dinner and plays a song for
you.
Fair enough.
So just on flutes, is it flutist or flautist?
Flutist.
Okay.
One vote for flautist.
It seems to be that in America, it's flutist.
Although one of the greatest ever players, Julius Baker, he has said it should be flutition.
Mmm.
Like a beauty.
It tells us that one of the flutes are flutist.
I've always said flautist.
I thought that was the...
I think it is the standard in the UK, definitely.
I do.
Me too.
I think that's because we're British.
Dan?
Yeah.
I'm not a good one to ask.
I only just found out through James that I've been saying "peanest" wrong this whole
time.
That it's a "peanest".
Okay.
But flutes are four times as old as farming.
Yeah.
People were just eating flutes for the first 30,000 years.
They...
They found these bones with holes in them, didn't they?
And the holes are the correct distance apart to make you think that they must be a flutist.
Mmm.
I'm a little bit unconvinced by it, I must say.
But that is like...
Well, so there's one which I think they more convinced by, which is 35,000 years old.
And there's one which is a bit of a borderline case, and that's the one I'm betting on, which
is 43,000 years old.
It could be unbelievably good luck that there are these holes in it, or it could be there
a lot of bones with some of them must have holes in it in the right spaces.
But the 43,000-year-old one is the leg bone of a cave bear, which is an incredibly epic thing
to make.
I know.
I mentioned the combination of skills that you need to be a flute player in 43,000 years
ago.
You need to be able to kill a bear, but also to have the finesse.
Yeah.
Did you play?
That is incredible.
We can safely say that the coolest guy in an orchestra, or girl, which is not a difficult
thing to be, I know, but it's definitely the person who's playing the bear's limb.
In 1969, there was an Australian park ranger, and he heard the sound of a flute playing
in the park, and it turned out that it was a bird called the Liabird, and the Liabird
can copy people's noises, and you know, you sometimes see them on like a nature documentaries
where they're making the sound of drills or something like that or mobile phones because
they've copied them.
So he heard this bird that was singing a tune that sounded just like a flute, and he did
some research, and he found that 30 years earlier, there was a flute player who'd lived near
the park with a pet Liabird, and he used to play the flute to this bird, and then he let
the bird go free into the forest.
And what he surmises is that that bird then taught the song to all the other Liabirds,
and so what we're hearing now in the, or in 1969, in the forest was like a recording of
a 1930s song that that guy had played on his flute.
And it was that song about the Dennis the Menace from Venice, wasn't it?
We should make full orchestra's out of birds to save us having to carve all these instruments
out of bear limbs.
We could just train up Liabirds to play everything.
Or like Beyoncé should release her next album, Purely Unburished.
Okay, just one thing going back to medieval punishment very quickly, in medieval Ireland,
the punishment for masturbation was penance of 120 days, so you had to do your Hail Mary's
and our fathers and stuff for 120 days, and for a priest it was a penance of a full year
every time you masturbated you had to do that.
And that is according to the penitential of Cmeneanus, which is the penitential of Cmeneanus.
There was a guy called Cmeneanus, and he wrote that these rules about, so I'm getting a bit
of interference, what was he called, James, so he was called, he was also sometimes called
just Cmenean, if you didn't call me Fred.
If you wanted to Latinise his name, it was Cmeneanus.
Well, I bet he didn't want to Latinise his name very much.
Okay, that is it, that is all of our facts, thank you so much for listening.
If you'd like to get in contact with any of us about the things that we have said over
the course of this podcast, we can be found on our Twitter accounts.
I'm on @Sriberland, James, @Jamesharkin, Andy, @Andruhunterim, and Anna.
You can email podcast@ky.com.
Yep, or you can go to our group account, which is @nosuchthing or our website, nosuchthing
as a fish.com.
We have everything up there from all of our previous episodes to links to merchandise.
So thanks for joining us this week, as ever, we hope you and your family members are still
doing well and you're all safe in these crazy, crazy times.
And we thank you for continuing to listen to us as well during this pandemic.
We'll be back again next week with another episode, so we'll see you then, goodbye.
[Music]
[BLANK_AUDIO]